README.md, before:

# bmp2c

Convert 1-bpp BMP files into MISRA-friendly C arrays for embedded displays, and emit 2-D matrices from folders — with deterministic formatting and explicit rules.

- Bit order in byte: LSB-first (bit 0 = first pixel in each 8-pixel group)
- Packing orientation: Row-major — pack pixels in runs of 8 horizontally
- Scan direction: Top-left origin; left-to-right within rows; rows top-to-bottom
- Foreground mapping: Black = 1, White = 0
- Input: 1-bpp BMP only by default; optional fixed-threshold binarization (128) via `--allow-threshold`
- Edits (pre-pack): invert, flip-h, flip-v, rotate 90/180/270 (clockwise), trim (auto-crop white), pad (L/R/T/B), draw (`--draw "x,y,set|clear"`)

No network access. Deterministic output. Library + CLI (`python -m bmp2c ...`).

---

## Exact Packing Definitions

### Row-major (default)

- For each row `y = 0..height-1`, iterate `x` in steps of 8: `x = 0, 8, 16, ...`.
- Build byte `b` where bit `i = 0..7` corresponds to pixel `(x+i, y)` if within bounds.
- Set bit `i` if the pixel is black (1). Bit 0 is the leftmost pixel of the 8-run.
- Total bytes = `ceil(width/8) * height`.

### Vertical pages (SSD1306-style)

If you need 8-pixel vertical bytes, use:

```
--pack page
```

- For each page `p = 0..ceil(height/8)-1`, set `y0 = p*8`.
- For `x = 0..width-1`, form a byte with bit `i = 0..7` = pixel at `(x, y0+i)` (1 if black, else 0).
- LSB is the top pixel; MSB is `y0+7`.
- Total bytes = `width * ceil(height/8)`.

---

## GUI Mode

A simple Tk/ttk GUI is included.

Run it with:

```
bmp2c-gui
# or:
bmp2c gui
# or:
python -m bmp2c.gui
```

- Browse File to convert a single BMP (1-bpp by default).
- Browse Folder to process a folder (per-file `.c` + a matrix); mixed sizes are grouped into separate matrices by default.
- Options mirror the CLI: pack (row/page), sort (alpha/natural), edits (invert, flip, rotate, trim, pad, draws), allow-threshold, emit-dims.
- Defaults: the GUI uses `pack=page` by default; output directory is optional and defaults next to the input.

---

## Notes

- The GUI runs work on a background thread and streams stdout/stderr to the log panel.
- Edit semantics match the CLI (e.g., non-1-bpp without `--allow-threshold` or out-of-bounds `--draw` raise errors). The GUI groups mixed sizes by default instead of failing.

---

## Run From Source (no install)

You can run directly from the repo without installing the package. Ensure Python 3.11+ is available and that the `Pillow` dependency is installed in your environment.

- Bash/Zsh:

```
export PYTHONPATH=src
python -m bmp2c.cli --help     # CLI
python -m bmp2c.gui            # GUI
```

- Windows PowerShell:

```
$env:PYTHONPATH = "src"
python -m bmp2c.cli --help     # CLI
python -m bmp2c.gui            # GUI
```

- Windows cmd.exe:

```
set PYTHONPATH=src
python -m bmp2c.cli --help     # CLI
python -m bmp2c.gui            # GUI
```

Tip: If `Pillow` is missing, either install it directly (`python -m pip install Pillow`) or use the editable install flow below to resolve all dependencies.

---

## Fresh Virtual Environment (editable)

Recommended for development: create a clean venv and install in editable mode.

- Bash/Zsh (Linux/macOS/Git Bash):

```
deactivate 2>/dev/null || true   # ignore if not active
rm -rf .venv
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
python -m pip install -U pip setuptools wheel
python -m pip install -e .

# Run GUI
bmp2c-gui
# If wrapper doesn’t open in your shell:
python -m bmp2c.gui

# CLI
bmp2c --help
# or:
python -m bmp2c.cli --help
```

- Windows PowerShell:

```
# Ignore if not active
deactivate
Remove-Item -Recurse -Force .venv -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue
python -m venv .venv
./.venv/Scripts/Activate.ps1
python -m pip install -U pip setuptools wheel
python -m pip install -e .

# Run GUI
bmp2c-gui
# If wrapper doesn’t open in your shell:
python -m bmp2c.gui

# CLI
bmp2c --help
# or:
python -m bmp2c.cli --help
```

Once installed (editable or regular), console scripts `bmp2c` and `bmp2c-gui` are available on your PATH.

---

## Self-test

Run the internal test suite from the CLI:

```
python -m bmp2c --selftest
```

---

## Generated C Header (attribution)

Generated `.c` files include a concise comment header with:

- Project link: `https://github.com/AlisonLuan/bmp2c`
- Generator and version: `bmp2c vX.Y.Z`
- “Generated — do not edit by hand” notice
- Author’s reminder to keep the repository link when sharing/redistributing

This follows common practice for code generators: include a short provenance banner so downstream users can trace the tool and version used.

Commit message:

Add Windows build script and improve asset handling
Introduces a build.sh script for building Windows executables with PyInstaller, including automatic icon generation from logo.png. Updates README with build instructions, adds logo.png as package data in pyproject.toml, and enhances GUI asset lookup to support PyInstaller frozen mode. Also adds icon.ico for Windows executables.

README.md, after:

# bmp2c

![bmp2c logo](src/bmp2c/logo.png)

Convert 1-bpp BMP files into MISRA-friendly C arrays for embedded displays, and emit 2-D matrices from folders — with deterministic formatting and explicit rules.

- Bit order in byte: LSB-first (bit 0 = first pixel in each 8-pixel group)
- Packing orientation: Row-major — pack pixels in runs of 8 horizontally
- Scan direction: Top-left origin; left-to-right within rows; rows top-to-bottom
- Foreground mapping: Black = 1, White = 0
- Input: 1-bpp BMP only by default; optional fixed-threshold binarization (128) via `--allow-threshold`
- Edits (pre-pack): invert, flip-h, flip-v, rotate 90/180/270 (clockwise), trim (auto-crop white), pad (L/R/T/B), draw (`--draw "x,y,set|clear"`)

No network access. Deterministic output. Library + CLI (`python -m bmp2c ...`).

---

## Exact Packing Definitions

### Row-major (default)

- For each row `y = 0..height-1`, iterate `x` in steps of 8: `x = 0, 8, 16, ...`.
- Build byte `b` where bit `i = 0..7` corresponds to pixel `(x+i, y)` if within bounds.
- Set bit `i` if the pixel is black (1). Bit 0 is the leftmost pixel of the 8-run.
- Total bytes = `ceil(width/8) * height`.

### Vertical pages (SSD1306-style)

If you need 8-pixel vertical bytes, use:

```
--pack page
```

- For each page `p = 0..ceil(height/8)-1`, set `y0 = p*8`.
- For `x = 0..width-1`, form a byte with bit `i = 0..7` = pixel at `(x, y0+i)` (1 if black, else 0).
- LSB is the top pixel; MSB is `y0+7`.
- Total bytes = `width * ceil(height/8)`.

---

## GUI Mode

A simple Tk/ttk GUI is included.

Run it with:

```
bmp2c-gui
# or:
bmp2c gui
# or:
python -m bmp2c.gui
```

- Browse File to convert a single BMP (1-bpp by default).
- Browse Folder to process a folder (per-file `.c` + a matrix); mixed sizes are grouped into separate matrices by default.
- Options mirror the CLI: pack (row/page), sort (alpha/natural), edits (invert, flip, rotate, trim, pad, draws), allow-threshold, emit-dims.
- Defaults: the GUI uses `pack=page` by default; output directory is optional and defaults next to the input.

---

## Notes

- The GUI runs work on a background thread and streams stdout/stderr to the log panel.
- Edit semantics match the CLI (e.g., non-1-bpp without `--allow-threshold` or out-of-bounds `--draw` raise errors). The GUI groups mixed sizes by default instead of failing.

---

## Run From Source (no install)

You can run directly from the repo without installing the package. Ensure Python 3.11+ is available and that the `Pillow` dependency is installed in your environment.

- Bash/Zsh:

```
export PYTHONPATH=src
python -m bmp2c.cli --help     # CLI
python -m bmp2c.gui            # GUI
```

- Windows PowerShell:

```
$env:PYTHONPATH = "src"
python -m bmp2c.cli --help     # CLI
python -m bmp2c.gui            # GUI
```

- Windows cmd.exe:

```
set PYTHONPATH=src
python -m bmp2c.cli --help     # CLI
python -m bmp2c.gui            # GUI
```

Tip: If `Pillow` is missing, either install it directly (`python -m pip install Pillow`) or use the editable install flow below to resolve all dependencies.

---

## Fresh Virtual Environment (editable)

Recommended for development: create a clean venv and install in editable mode.

- Bash/Zsh (Linux/macOS/Git Bash):

```
deactivate 2>/dev/null || true   # ignore if not active
rm -rf .venv
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
python -m pip install -U pip setuptools wheel
python -m pip install -e .

# Run GUI
bmp2c-gui
# If wrapper doesn’t open in your shell:
python -m bmp2c.gui

# CLI
bmp2c --help
# or:
python -m bmp2c.cli --help
```

- Windows PowerShell:

```
# Ignore if not active
deactivate
Remove-Item -Recurse -Force .venv -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue
python -m venv .venv
./.venv/Scripts/Activate.ps1
python -m pip install -U pip setuptools wheel
python -m pip install -e .

# Run GUI
bmp2c-gui
# If wrapper doesn’t open in your shell:
python -m bmp2c.gui

# CLI
bmp2c --help
# or:
python -m bmp2c.cli --help
```

Once installed (editable or regular), console scripts `bmp2c` and `bmp2c-gui` are available on your PATH.

---

## Self-test

Run the internal test suite from the CLI:

```
python -m bmp2c --selftest
```

---

## Build Windows Binaries (build.sh)

The repository includes a convenience script to produce standalone Windows executables using PyInstaller.

- What it does: Creates a fresh virtualenv, installs dependencies and PyInstaller, converts `logo.png` into an `.ico`, builds `bmp2c-gui.exe` (GUI, windowed) and `bmp2c.exe` (CLI, console), and writes them to `output/`.
- Requirements: Windows, Git Bash (or MSYS2 Bash), Python 3.11+ on PATH, and internet access to fetch build dependencies.
- Icons: Uses `src/bmp2c/logo.png` to generate an `.ico` with multiple sizes.
- Bundled assets: `logo.png` is bundled into the EXEs and the GUI looks it up in frozen mode (PyInstaller) via `_MEIPASS`, avoiding missing-file issues.

Run (Git Bash):

```
./build.sh
```

Outputs:

```
output/bmp2c-gui.exe
output/bmp2c.exe
```

Notes:
- The script is tailored for Windows (virtualenv activation path is `Scripts`). On Linux/macOS, adjust the activation path to `bin` and build native binaries for that OS instead.
- The script removes `output/`, `build/`, `dist/`, `.venv_build/`, `.build_assets/` before building.

If you prefer to run PyInstaller manually, check `build.sh` for the exact steps (creating small launcher stubs and invoking PyInstaller with `--windowed` for GUI and `--console` for CLI).

## Generated C Header (attribution)

Generated `.c` files include a concise comment header with:

- Project link: `https://github.com/AlisonLuan/bmp2c`
- Generator and version: `bmp2c vX.Y.Z`
- “Generated — do not edit by hand” notice
- Author’s reminder to keep the repository link when sharing/redistributing

This follows common practice for code generators: include a short provenance banner so downstream users can trace the tool and version used.
